How did viewing a diff between two versions of a file help you see the bug that
was introduced?

    Fill in your answer here

How could having easy access to the entire history of a file make you a more
efficient programmer in the long term?

    Fill in your answer here

What do you think are the pros and cons of manually choosing when to create a
commit, like you do in Git, vs having versions automatically saved, like Google
docs does?

    Fill in your answer here

Why do you think some version control systems, like Git, allow saving multiple
files in one commit, while others, like Google Docs, treat each file separately?

    Fill in your answer here

How can you use the commands git log and git diff to view the history of files?

    Fill in your answer here

How might using version control make you more confident to make changes that
could break something?

    Fill in your answer here

Now that you have your workspace set up, what do you want to try using Git for?

    Fill in your answer here
How Critical Reflection
Triggers
Transformative Learning
Jack Mezirow
To make meaning means to make sense of an experience; we
make an interpretation of it. When we subsequently use this
interpretation to guide decision making or action, then making
meaning becomes learning. We learn differently when we are
learning to perform than when we are learning to understand
what is being communicated to us. Reflection enables us to
cor-rect distortions in our beliefs and errors in problem solving.
Critical reflection involves a critique of the presuppositions on
which our beliefs have been built.
This chapter elaborates on these ideas to attempt to develop
a theoretical foundation for explaining how transformations
occur in adult learning. The remainder of this volume
addresses the ways educators can foster such learning.
Learning may be defined as the process of making a new
or revised interpretation of the meaning of an experience,
which guides subsequent understanding, appreciation, and
action. What we perceive and fail to perceive and what we
think and fail to think are powerfully influenced by habits of
expectation that constitute our frame of reference, that is, a set
of assumptions that structure the way we interpret our
experiences. It is not possible to understand the nature of adult
learning or education without taking into account the cardinal
role played by these habits in making meaning.
1
Chapter 1, Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood by J. Mezirow and
Associates, 1990, Jossey Bass, pp. 1- 20.
It is helpful to differentiate two dimensions of making meaning.
Meaning schemes are sets of related and habitual expectations
governing if-then, cause-effect, and category relationships as
well as event sequences. We expect food to satisfy our hunger;
turning the knob and pushing on a door to open it. We expect
that it will take less time to get somewhere if we run rather than
walk; that the sun will rise in the east and set in the west. When
we open the front door, we expect to see our front lawn, not a
tidal wave or a charging rhino. Meaning schemes are habitual,
implicit rules for interpreting.
Meaning perspectives are made up of higher-order schemata,
theories, propositions, beliefs, prototypes, goal
orientations, and evaluations, and what linguists call “networks
of arguments.” Lover-beloved, teacher-student, employeremployee,
priest-parishoner, and other familiar role
relationships are predicated on established meaning perspectives
involving habitual expectations familiar to everyone. Meaning
perspectives refer to the structure of assumptions within which
new experience is assimilated and transformed by one’s past
experience during he process of interpretation. They involve the
application of habits of expectation to objects or events to form
an interpretation.
2 Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood
Structuring Meaning
These habits of expectation are analyzed by the writers in
other chapters of this book as personal constructs, perceptual
filters, conceptual maps, metaphors, personal ideologies,
repressed functions, and developmental stages. Learning styles
such as “field dependent” and “field independent” are also habits
of expectation that become meaning perspectives when used to
interpret an event. All these habits of expectation and many other
predispositions provide the presuppositions on which we make
interpretations and take action.
Meaning perspectives are also the distinctive ways an
individual interprets experience at what developmental psychologists
describe as different stages of moral, ethical, and ego development
and different stages of reflective judgment. Meaning
perspectives involve criteria for making value judgments and
How Critical Reflection Triggers Learning 3
for belief systems. We are familiar with conservative; liberal,
and radical viewpoints and believe we can differentiate an Irishman
from a Frenchman or a painting that is ugly from tree that
is beautiful. Most meaning perspectives are acquired through
cultural assimilation, but others, like positivist, behaviorist,
Freudian, or Marxist perspectives, may be intentionally learned.
Others are stereotypes we have unintentionally learned
regarding what it means to be a woman, a parent, a manager, a
patriot, a member of a particular racial group, or an older
person. In addition to such sociocultural concepts, meaning
perspectives may also involve ways of understanding and using
knowledge and ways of dealing with feelings about oneself.
The most familiar examples of a meaning perspective and
of transformative learning come from the women’s movement
(see Chapter Three). Within a very few years, hundreds of
thousands of women whose personal identity, self-concept, and
values had been derived principally from prescribed social
norms and from acting out sex-stereotypical roles came to
challenge these assumptions and to redefine their lives in their
own terms. The women’s movement provided a support climate
for this kind of personal reappraisal by publicizing the
constraints on personal development, autonomy, and selfdetermination
imposed by such stereotypes and by providing
support groups and role models.
Perspectives provide principles for interpreting. They involve
symbol systems that represent “ideal types,” the qualities
of which we project onto objects or events in our experience.
What we then perceive is often seen as an instance of our
symbolic categories. Both schemes and perspectives selectively
order and delimit what we learn. They define our “horizons of
expectation,” which, as Karl Popper emphasized, significantly
affect the activities of perceiving, comprehending, and
remembering meaning wit the context of communication
(Berkson and Wettersten, 1984, p. 7).
Meaning perspectives are, for the most part, uncritically
acquired in childhood through the process of socialization, often
in the context of an emotionally charged relationship with
parents, teachers, or other mentors. The more intense the
emotional
context of learning and the more it is reinforced, the more deeply
embedded and intractable to change are the habits of expectation
that constitute our meaning perspectives. Experience strengthens,
extends, and refines our structures of meaning by reinforcing our
expectations about how things are supposed to be.
Our habits of expectation are not merely taken-for-granted
actions or reactions that tend to repeat themselves. They are
dispositions and capabilities that make up our everyday involvement
within situations that “make sense.” John Dewey saw habit
as a structure of experience that enables one to make sense of a
situation and consciousness itself as a possibility occasioned by
our acquired habits of involvement. “Phenomenologically, the
meaningfulness of present experience is an activity of habit, a
‘tension’ between habitual grooves of sensitivity and the world,
through which self and environment are simultaneously transformed”
(Ostrow, 1987, p. 214-216). Believing, valuing, perceiving,
thinking, and feeling are all affected by these patterns of
sensibility and stylistic preference with which we interpret the
meaning of objects and events.
To describe meaning schemes and perspectives as powered
by habits of expectation that construe and hence structure
meaning is not to suggest that they exist as structures of the brain
or storage bins for memory. Nor does it imply that experience
automatically follows the “habitual grooves” of sensitivity and
thus can only confirm our assumptions. This confirmation often
happens, but it happens only as the result of the dynamic
interaction between habit and the event being interpreted. The
process is often mediated by reflection.
Nonetheless, what we do and do not perceive, comprehend,
and remember is profoundly influenced by our meaning schemes
and perspectives. We trade off perception and cognition for relief
from the anxiety generated when the experience does not
comfortably fit these meaning structures (Goleman, 1985). When
experience is too strange or threatening to the way we think or
learn, we tend to block it out or resort to psychological defense
mechanisms to provide a more compatible interpretation.
4 Fostering Critical Reflection in
Adulthood
How Critical Reflection Triggers Learning 5
Reflection and Making Meaning
Reflection is generally used as a synonym for higher-order
mental processes. Boud, Keogh, and Walker (1985, p. 3) refer to
reflection as “a generic term for those intellectual and affective
activities in which individuals engage to explore their
experiences in order to lead to new understandings and
appreciation.” By this definition, reflection would include
making inferences, generaliza- tions, analogies, discriminations,
and evaluations, as well as feeling, remembering, and solving
problems. It also seems to refer to using beliefs to make an
interpretation, to analyze, perform, discuss, or judge---however
unaware one may be of doing so. Although such a broad
definition faithfully reflects common usage, the term needs
additional analysis to differentiate reflection from thinking or
learning, of which it is a part.
For Dewey (1933, p. 9), reflection referred to “assessing the
grounds [justification] of one’s beliefs,” the process of rationally
examining the assumptions by which we have been justifying our
convictions. The critical dimension in Dewey’s definition is
echoed in Webster’s International Dictionary (1950) as the
“mental consideration of some subject matter, idea or purpose,
often with a view to understanding or accepting it, or seeing it in
its right relations.” Dewey’s definition provides us with a useful
point of departure for understanding some fundamental
distinctions regard- ing adult learning.
Because we must accommodate to a life of continual and
rapid change, most of what we learn is the result of our efforts to
solve problems, from the infant’s problem of how to get fed to
the adult’s problem of how to understand the meaning of life.
Much of what we learn involves making new
interpretations that enable us to elaborate, further differentiate,
and re-inforce our long-established frames of reference or to
create new meaning schemes. Perhaps even more central to adult
learning than elaborating established. meaning schemes is the
process of reflection bac on prior learning to determine whether
what we have learned is justified under present circumstances.
This is a crucial learning process egregiously ignored by learning
theorists.
Dewey and William James helped us understand that the process
by which we define and solve problems becomes the context for
most learning. What is important here is to make explicit the
differences involved in reflecting on the content, process, or
premises of problem solving.
If reflection is understood as an assessment of how or why
we have perceived, thought, felt, or acted, it must be
differentiated from an assessment of how best to perform these
functions when each phase of an action is guided by what we
have learned before. Simply reflexively drawing on what one
already knows in order to act is not the same thing as reflection.
Instead, this is the way one often takes thoughtful action in
playing chess or making an argument or otherwise using one’s
wits while actively engaged. All human action, other than that
which is purely habitual or thoughtless, is thoughtful action,
which involves consciously drawing on what one knows to guide
one’s action.
Reflective action, understood as action predicated on a
critical assessment of assumptions, may also be an integral part
of decision making. Thoughtful action is reflexive but is not the
same thing as acting reflectively to critically examine the
justification for one’s beliefs. Reflection in thoughtful action
involves a pause to reassess by asking, What am I doing wrong?
The pause may be only a split second in the decision-making
process. Reflection may thus be integral to deciding how best to
perform or may involve an ex post facto reassessment. When
applied to deciding how best to perform immediately, reflection
becomes an integral element of thoughtful action. Consequently,
although reflection and action are dialectic in their relationship,
they should not be polarized as in Kolb (1984).
Ex post facto reflection, which looks back on prior
learning, may focus on assumptions about the content of the
problem, the process or procedures followed in problem solving,
or the presupposition on the basis of which the problem has been
posed. Reflection on presuppositions is what we mean by critical
reflection. These distinctions are graphically depicted in Figure
1.1.
Edward Cell (1984) makes a helpful distinction between
active and reflective interpretation. The former can be a creative
process but one involving our prejudices, distortions, and pro-
6 Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood
How Critical Reflection Triggers Learning 7
Figure 1.1. Reflection.
Reflective Action Nonreflective Action
Thoughtful action
with reflection
Habitual
action
Thoughtful action
without reflection
Ex post facto
reflection
Instrumental Learning. When we engage in task-oriented
problem solving-how to do something or how to perform---we
are engaged in instrumental learning; reflection is significantly
involved when we look back on content or procedural
assumptions guiding the problem-solving process to reassess the
efficacy of the strategies and tactics used. We look back to
check on whether we have identified all the relevant options for
action, correctly assessed the consequences of alternative
hunches or hypotheses, controlled the right variables, used the
best methods of problem solving and used them correctly and
carefully, made inferences warranted from the evidence and as
free from bias as possible, generalized from a dependably
representative sample, and correctly interpreted the feedback on
actions taken.
We may also look to make sure that our actions have been
consistent with our values, to see how well we are doing in
relation to our goals, whether our attitude has been objective
and our interpretations of the results convincing. This is how we
vincialisms. Reflective interpretation is the process of
correcting distortions in our reasoning and attitudes. Active
interpretation is what is involved in thoughtful action; reflective
interpretation, in reflective action.
Presuppositions
(critical reflection)
Content Process
reflect on the process by which we have learned meaning
through instrumental problem solving. Metacognition is the
term psychol-ogists use to refer to this process of knowing
about cognitive states and their operations. The function of
metacognition is seen as that of informing and regulating
cognitive routines and strategies.
Instrumental learning involves the process of learning to
control and manipulate the environment or other people. Results
can be empirically demonstrated. The criteria for judging the
validity of our beliefs concerning prior instrumental learning
reside in (1) an informed consensus regarding the logic of
analysis and inference inherent in the paradigm of the problemsolving
process we have used and (2) empirical evidence about
whether our efforts have succeeded in solving the problem. We
can measure changes resulting from our learning to solve
problems in terms of productivity, performance, or behavior.
The problem-solving process for instrumental learning is a
familiar one. Essentially, it is the method of problem solving,
canonized by the natural sciences, that we all use or misuse in
learning how to do things.
Communicative Learning. Not all learning involves
learn-ing to do. Of even greater significance to most adult
learning is understanding the meaning of what others
communicate concerning values, ideals, feelings, moral
decisions, and such concepts as freedom, justice, love, labor,
autonomy, commitment, and democracy. When what is asserted
or implied pertains to these norm-governed concepts,
judgments, propositions, beliefs, opinions, or feelings, then
determining the conditions under which such an assertion is
valid requires a two-dimensional assessment. This includes a
critique of the assertion itself. It also requires a critique of the
relevant social norms and of cultural codes that determine the
allocation of influence and power over whose interpretations are
acceptable.
Communicative learning focuses on achieving coherence
rather than on exercising more effective control over the causeeffect
relationship to improve performance, as in instrumental
learning. The problem-solving process involved in instrumen-
8 Fostering Critical Reflection in
Adulthood
Because instrumental learning involves learning to
control and manipulate the environment or other people,
results are amenable to empirical demonstration. Validating a
belief in the realm of communicative learning involves making
a judgment regarding the situation and its circumstances in
which what is
Validating Meaning
How Critical Reflection Triggers Learning 9
tal learning is the hypothetico-deductive approach. 1n communicative
learning, the approach is one in which the learner
attempts to understand what it meant by another through
speech, writing, drama, art, or dance. Communicative
learning is less a matter of testing hypotheses than of
searching, often intuitively, for themes and metaphors by
which to fit the unfamiliar into a meaning perspective, so
than an interpretation becomes possible.
In our encounters with the unfamiliar, we begin with
par-tial insights to direct the way we collect additional data;
com-pare incidents, key concepts, or words; and relate
emergent patterns metaphorically to our meaning
perspectives. When the properties of the event do not fit our
existing schema, we create new meaning schemes to
integrate them. Each item of relevant information becomes a
building block of understanding, which is transformed by
further insight. We continually move back and forth between
the parts and the whole of that which we seek to understand
and between the event and our habits of expec-tation,
following the process described as the “hermeneutic cir-cle”
(Bernstein, 1985, pp. 131-139). Over time, the resulting
understanding can be further transformed as we come to
discover its metaphoric significance in other experiential,
theoretical, literary, or esthetic contexts.
Reflection in communicative learning is a critical
assess-ment of this distinctive process of problem solving,
checking to make sure that we have accurately identified the
distinguishing patterns of similarity and have found
metaphoric labels that give them coherence in relation to a
meaning perspective. Interpreting the unfamiliar is one major
way meaning is construed. Another has to do with
establishing the validity of an expressed idea.
10 Fostering Critical Reflection in
Adulthood
asserted is justified. To understand the meaning of a
sentence or any expressed idea, one must understand under
what conditions it is true (in accord with what is) or valid
(justifiable) (Habermas, 1984, p. 276). We can turn to an
authority, tradition, or force to establish the validity of an
assertion, or we can turn to a decision by rational
discourse, that is, a consensus regarding its justification. In
communicative learning there are no empirical tests of
truth; we rely on consensual validation of what is asserted.
In everyday situations, we challenge the validity of
what is being communicated when we have doubts about
the truth, comprehensibility, appropriateness (in relation to
social norms), or authenticity (in relation to feelings) of
what is said or about the truthfulness of the speaker or
writer. Further dialogue is interrupted until we can satisfy
ourselves that the problematic assertion is justifiable. We
engage in reflective learning through the kind of discourse
in which we bracket our prior judgments, attempt to hold
our biases in abeyance, and, through a critical review of
the evidence and arguments, make a determination about
the justifiability of the expressed idea whose meaning is
contested. This very special form of discourse is also
distin-guished by its objective, which is to arrive at an
agreement about the justification of an expressed idea as
an end in itself.
Because we are all trapped by our own meaning
perspectives, we can never really make interpretations of
our experience free of bias. Consequently, our greatest
assurance of objectivity comes from exposing an expressed
idea to rational and reflective discourse. Nonreflective
learning is defined by Habermas (1976, p. 16) as learning
that “takes place in action contexts in which implicitly
raised theoretical and practical validity claims are naively
taken for granted and accepted or rejected without
discursive consideration.”
To seek a consensus, we turn to those we feel are
best informed, least biased, and most rational to critically
assess the evidence and arguments and arrive consensually
at the best judgment. As new evidence and new ways of
seeing emerge, this provisional judgment about the
validity of a disputed belief is subject to change. Because
each situation in which an assertion
How Critical Reflection Triggers Learning 11
is true is significantly shaped by social norms and cultural
codes, validity testing also implies a critical assessment of how
appropriate they are at this time. As situations change, social
norms change, and the validity of what is asserted is subject to
change as well. The informed consensus we seek is provisional;
it is the best we have at the moment. It may be changed with the
addition of new evidence or new arguments based on a more
inclusive paradigm or meaning perspective.
Ideally, the consensus would be such that any informed,
objective, and rational person who examined the evidence
andheard the arguments would agree, much as it is assumed in a
court case that one juror may be replaced with antoher, but the
jury’s decision would be the same.
In reality, the consensus on which we depend to validate
expressed ideas almost never approximates the ideal. We never
have complete information, are seldom entirely free from
external or psychic coercion of some sort, are not always open
to
unfamiliar and divergent perspectives, may lack the ability to
engage in rational and critically reflective argumentation,
seldom insist that each participant have the freedom and
equality to assume the same roles in the dialogue (to speak,
challenge, cri-tique, defend), and only sometimes let our
conclusions rest on the evidence and on the cogency of the
arguments alone.
Nevertheless, Habermas argues that these standards are
implicit in the very nature of human communication. One would
not participate in a discourse without implicitly accepting the
supposition that genuine consensus is possible and that it can be
distinguished from false consensus (McCarthy, 1978, pp. 307-
308). As such, these standards can serve as a philosophical
foundation and as criteria for judging both education and the
social conditions prerequisite to free and full participation in
reflective discourse. No need is more fundamentally human than
our need to understand the meaning of our experience. Free, full
participation in critical and reflective discourse may be
interepreted as a basic human right. This concept suggests an
epistemological foundation for understanding such constructs as
rationality, freedom, objectivity, adult development, democratic
participation, social responsibility, self-directedness, and adult
education.
12 Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood
Critical Reflection
Whereas reflection involves the assessment of the
assumptions implicit in beliefs, including beliefs about how to
solve problems, there is a special class of assumptions with
which reflection has to deal that are quite different from these
procedural considerations. While all reflection implies an
element of critique, the term critical reflection will here be
reserved to refer to challenging the validity of presuppositions
in prior learning. (Although it would be more exact to speak of
premise reflection, so many of us have used critical reflection to
mean the same thing that it seems better to continue this
practice.) Critical reflection addresses the question of the.
Justification for the very premises on which problems are posed
or defined in the first place. We very commonly check our prior
learning to confirm that we have correctly proceeded to solve
problems, but becoming critically aware of our own
presuppositions involves challenging our established and
habitual patterns of expectation, the meaning perspectives with
which we have made sense out of our encounters with the
world, others, and ourselves. To question the validity of a longtaken-
for-granted meaning perspective predicated on a
presupposition about oneself can involve the negation of values
that have been very close to the center of one’s self-concept. An
example is the time-honored definition of what it means to be a
“good” woman, which was questioned through the
consciousness raising of the women’s movement. Challenges
and negations of our conventional criteria of self-assessment are
always fraught with threat and strong emotion. Transformation
of perspective has cognitive, affective, and conative dimensions.
Taking action on a new transformative insight can be blocked
by external or internal constraints (or both), by situational and
psychic factors, or simply by inadequate information or lack of
skill to proceed.
We become critically reflective by challenging the established
definition of a problem being addressed, perhaps by
finding a new metaphor that reorients problem-solving efforts in
a more effective way. This crucially important personal learning
dynamic is analogous to the process of paradigm shift that
Thomas Kuhn (1970) characterized as the way revolutions
occur in science;
How Critical Reflection Triggers Learning 13
Which, after all, is only a more formal mode of inquiry for
construing the meaning of experience. As we encounter new
meaning perspectives that help us account for disturbing
anomalies in the way we understand our reality, personal as
well as scientific paradigm shifts can redirect the way we
engage the world.
By far the most significant learning experiences in
adulthood involve critical self-reflection---reassessing the way
we have posed problems and reassessing our own orientation to
perceiving, knowing, believing, feeling, and acting. Arlin
(1975) has found problem posing to be the most significant
characteristic of adult development beyond the acquisition of
formal operations in adolescence.
Although reflection may be an integral part of making
action decisions as well as an ex post facto critique of the process,
critical reflection cannot become an integral element in
the immediate action process. It requires a hiatus in which to
reassess one’s meaning perspectives and, if necessary, to
transform them. Critical reflection is not concerned with the
how or the how-to of action but with the why, the reasons for
and consequences of what we do.
Adulthood is the time for reassessing the assumptions
of our formative years that have often resulted in distorted
views of reality. Our meaning schemes may be transformed
through reflection upon anomalies. For example, a housewife
goes to secretarial school in the evening and finds to her
amazement that the other women do not have to rush home
to cook dinner for their husbands as she does. Perspective
transformations may occur through an accretion of such
transformed meaning schemes. As a result of the
transformation of several specific meaning schemes
connected with her role as the traditional housewife, she
comes to question her own identity as predicated upon
previously assumed sex stereotypes.
In addition, and more predictably, perspective
transformation occurs in response to an externally imposed
disorienting dilemma---a divorce, death of a loved one,
change in job status,
Perspective Transformation
14 Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood
Meaning perspectives are transformed through a
critically reflective assessment of epistemic, sociocultural, and
psychic distortions acquired through the process of introjection,
the uncritical acceptance of another’s values. While it is
desirable for learners to understand how ideology in the wider
sense affects distorted epistemic and psychic beliefs, for
purposes of making educational interventions these
perspectives need to be differentiated from distorted, normative
social beliefs, here designated as ideological.
Distortions in Meaning Perspective
retirement, or other. The distorting dilemma may be evoked
by an eye-opening discussion, book, poem, or painting or by
one’s efforts to understand a different culture that challenges
one’s presuppositions. Anomalies and dilemmas of which old
ways of knowing cannot make sense become catalysts or
“trigger events” that precipitate critical reflection and
transformations. Changing social norms can make it much
easier to encounter, entertain, and sustain changes in
alternative perspectives.
Perspective transformation may be individual, as in
psychotherapy; group, as in Freire’s (1970) learning circles or
in “popular education” in Latin America; or collective, as in
the civil rights, anti-Vietnam War, and women'’ movements.
Perspective transformation is the process of becoming
critically aware of how and why our presuppositions have
come to constrain the way we perceive, understand, and feel
about our world; of reformulating these assumptions to permit
a more inclusive, discriminating, permeable, and integrative
perspective; and of making decisions or otherwise acting
upon these new understandings. More inclusive,
discriminating, permeable, and integrative perspectives are
superior perspectives that adults choose if they can because
they are motivated to better understand the meaning of their
experience. Meaning perspectives that permit us to deal with
a broader range of experience, to be more discriminating, to
be more open to other perspectives, and to better integrate our
experiences are superior perspectives. There are three areas of
common distortion in perspective.
Epistemic Distortions. Epistemic distortions have to
do with the nature and use of knowledge. The chapter in this
volume by Kitchener and King elaborates on their extensive
empirical investigation of reflective judgment, which has
iden-tified the developmental stages by which we move
away from the distorted presupposition that every problem
has a correct solution if we could only find the right expert,
and toward a provisional consensual judgment based upon
critical discourse. Individuals at each stage have a
distinctive meaning perspective about problem solving. It
might be more accurate to refer to such earlier ways of
knowing as less developed rather than distorted, although
any way of construing meaning in adulthood other than one
involving reflective judgment-- which is developmentally
more inclusive, differentiating, permeable, and integrative--
could be seen as a distortion of the ideal.
Another epistemic distortion is reification, seeing a
phe-nomenon produced by social interaction as immutable,
beyond human control, like the law, the government, atomic
warfare, environmental destruction, homelessness, famine,
or the mil-itary-industrial complex. A third distortion is
using as prescriptive knowledge that is based on description;
for example, using what psychologists describe as life stages
as standards for judging a particular individual’s
development. Yet another distortion is regarding an
abstraction as though it were an existing object, objectifying
it (Whitehead’s “fallacy of misplaced concreteness”).
Interpreting reality concretely when what is required is
interpreting it abstractly is a familiar epistemic distortion.
Still another is the early positivist supposition that only
those propositions are meaningful that are empirically
verifiable.
How Critical Reflection Triggers Learning 15
Sociocultural Distortions. Sociocultural distortions
involve taking for granted belief systems that pertain to power
and social relationships, especially those currently prevailing
and legitimized and enforced by institutions. A common
sociocultural distortion is mistaking self-fulfilling and selfvalidating
beliefs for beliefs that are not self-fulfilling or selfvalidating.
If we believe that members of a subgroup are lazy,
unintelligent, and unreliable and treat them accordingly, they
may become lazy,
16 Fostering Critical Reflection in
Adulthood
unintelligent, and unreliable. We have created a self-fulfilling
prophecy. When based on mistaken premises in the first place,
such a belief becomes a distorted meaning perspective.
Another distortion of this type is assuming that the particular
interest of a subgroup is the general interest of the group as a
whole (Geuss, 1981, p. 14). When people refer to ideology as
a distorted belief system, they usually refer to what here is
understood as socio-cultural distortion.
As critical social theorists have emphasized, ideology
can become a form of false consciousness in that it supports,
stab-ilizes, or legitimates dependency-producing social
institutions, unjust social practices, and relations of
exploitation, exclusion, and domination. It reflects the
hegemony of the collective, mainstream meaning perspective
and existing power relationships that actively support the
status quo. Ideology is a form of prereflective consciousness,
which does not question the validity of existing social norms
and resists critique of presuppositions. Such social amnesia is
manifested in every facet of our lives--- in the economic,
political, social, health, religious, educational, occupational,
and familial. Television has become a major force in
perpetuating and extending the hegemony of mainstream
ideology.
The work of Paulo Freire (1970) in traditional village
cultures has demonstrated how an adult educator can
precipitate as well as facilitate learning that is critically
reflective of long-established and oppressive social norms.
Psychic Distortions. Psychological distortions have to
do with presuppositions generating unwarranted anxiety that
impedes taking action. Psychiatrist Roger Gould’s
“epigenetic” theory of adult development (1978, 1988)
suggests that trau-matic events in childhood can result in
parental prohibitions that though submerged from
consciousness continue to inhibit adult action by generating
anxiety feelings when there is a risk of breaching them. This
dynamic results in a lost function--such as the ability to
confront, to feel sexual, or take risks-that must be regained if
one is to become a fully functioning adult.
How Critical Reflection Triggers Learning 17
Adulthood is a time of regaining such lost functions.
The learner must be helped to identify both the particular
action that he or she feels blocked about taking and the
source and nature of stress in making a decision to act. The
learner is assisted in identifying the source of this inhibition
and differentiating between the anxiety that is a function of
childhood trauma and the anxiety that is warranted by his or
her immediate adult life situation. With guidance, the adult
can learn to distinguish between past and present pressures
and between irrational and rational feelings and to challenge
distorting assumptions (such as “If I confront, I may lose all
control and violently assault”) that inhibit taking the needed
action and regaining the lost function.
The psychoeducational process of helping adults learn
to overcome such ordinary existential psychological
distortions can be facilitated by skilled adult counselors and
educators as well as by therapists. It is crucially important
that they do so, inasmuch as the most significant adult
learning occurs in con-nection with life transitions. While
psychotherapists make transference inferences in a treatment
modality, educators do not---but they can provide skillful
emotional support and collaborate as co-learners in an
educational context. Recent advances in counseling
technology greatly enhance their potential for providing this
kind of help. For example, Roger Gould’s therapeutic
learning program in Chapter Seven represents an
extraordinary resource for counselors and educators working
with adults who are having trouble dealing with such
stressful existential life transitions as divorce, retirement,
returning to school or the work force, or a change in job
status. This interactive, computerized program of guided
self-study provides the learner with the clinical insights and
many of the benefits associated with short-term
psychotherapy. The counselor or educator provides
emotional support, helps the learner think through choices
posed by the program, explains its theoretical context,
provides supplementary information relevant to the life
transition, makes referrals, and leads group discussion as
required.
18 Fostering Critical Reflection in Adulthood
Summary
This chapter briefly adumbrates an emerging transormation
theory of adult learning in which the construing of
meaning is of central importance. Following Habermas (1984), I
make a fundamental distinction between instrumental and
communicative learning. I have identified the central function
of reflection as that of validating what is known. Reflection, in
the context of problem solving, commonly focuses on
procedures or methods. It may also focus on premises.
Reflection on premises involves a critical review of distorted
presuppositions that may be epistemic, sociocultural, or
psychic. Meaning schemes and perspectives that are not viable
are transformed through reflection. Uncritically assimilated
meaning perspectives, which determine what, how, and why we
learn, may be transformed through critical reflection. Reflection
on one’s own premises can lead to transformative learning.
In communicative learning, meaning is validated through
critical discourse. The nature of discourse suggests ideal conditions
for participation in a consensual assessment of the
justifica- tion for an expressed or implied idea when its validity
is in doubt. These ideal conditions of human communication
provide a firm philosophical foundation for adult education.
Transformative learning involves a particular function of
reflection: reassessing the presuppositions on which our beliefs
are based and acting on insights derived from the transformed
meaning perspective that results from such reassessments. This
learning may occur in the domains of either instrumental or
communicative learning. It may involve correcting distorted
assumptions---epistemic, sociocultural, or psychic---from prior
learning. This introductory chapter constitutes the framework in
adult learning theory for understanding the efforts of the other
chapter authors, who suggest specific approaches to emancipatory
adult education.
Emancipatory education is an organized effort to help the
learner challenge presuppositions, explore alternative perspectives,
transform old ways of understanding, and act on new
perspectives. In the final chapter, I will discuss themes, issues,

How could having easy access to the entire history of a file make you a more efficient programmer in the long term?

If we have large file with 1000 of line of code then, undoing the file to a particular time stamp becomes easier with entire history on our disposal. Programmer can easily undo his/her work and save a lot of time.

What do you think are the pros and cons of manually choosing when to create a commit, like you do in Git, vs having versions automatically saved, like Google Docs does?

Now that you have your workspace set up, what do you want to try using Git for?

    
